---
date: 2024-02-11
---

## Concurrency Control

Anytime more than one query needs to change data at the same time. *CC* here has to be addressed at two levels: the server level and the storage engine level.

### Read/Write Locks

Systems that deal with concurrent read/write access typically implement a locking system that consists of two lock types. These locks are usually known as *shared locks* and *exclusive locks*, or *read locks* and *write locks*. Read locks on a resource are shared, or mutually non-blocking. Write locks are exclusive.

Write locks have a higher priority than read locks, so a request for a write lock will advance to the front of the lock queue even if readers are already in the queue (write locks can advance past read locks in the queue, but read locks cannot advance past write locks).

### Lock Granularity

One way to improve the concurrency of a shared resource is to be more selective about what to lock. Rather than locking the entire resource, lock only the part that contains the data need to change. Better yet, lock only the exact piece of data plan to change. Minimizing the amount of data to lock at any one time lets changes to a given resource occur simultaneously, as long as they don't conflict with each other.

### Locking Strategy

The problem is locks consume resources. Every lock operation: getting locks, checking to see whether a lock is free, releasing a lock, and etc. has overhead. If the system spends too much time managing locks instead of storing and retrieving data, performance can suffer.

A locking strategy is a compromise between lock overhead and data safety, and compromise affects performance. MySQL here offers choices. Its storage engines can implement their own locking policies and lock granularities. Lock management is a very important decision in storage engine design; fixing the granularity at a certain level can give better performance for certain uses, **yet make that less suited for other purposes. Because MySQL offers multiple storage engines, it doesn't require a single general-purpose solution.

#### Table locks

The most basic locking strategy available in MySQL, and the one with the lowest overhead, is *table locks*. It locks the entire table. Table locks have variations:

- `READ LOCAL`: Allow some type of concurrent write operations.
- `ALTER TABLE`: Issue to use table-level lock regardless of the storage engine.

#### Row locks

The locking style that offers the greatest concurrency (and carries the greatest overhead). In MySQL, it is available in the *InnoDB* and *XtraDB* storage engines. And row locks are implemented in the storage engine, not the server. 

## Transactions

A transaction is a group of SQL queries that are treated atomically, as a single unit of work. If the database engine can apply the entire group of queries to a database, it does so, but if any of them can't be done because of a crash or other reason, none of them is applied. It's all or nothing.

In MySQL, start a transaction with the `START TRANSACTION` statement and then either make its changes permanent with `COMMIT` or discard the changes with `ROLLBACK`.

Transactions aren't enough unless the system passes the *ACID* test.

### ACID

*ACID* stands for atomicity, consistency, isolation, durability.

#### Atomicity

A transaction must function as a single indivisible unit of work so that the entire transaction is either applied or rolled back. All or nothing.

#### Consistency

The database should always move from one consistent state to the next.

#### Isolation

The results of a transaction are *usually* invisible to other transactions until the transaction is complete.

##### Isolation levels

> Each storage engine implements isolation levels slightly differently.

The SQL standard defines four isolation levels, with specific rules for which changes are and aren't visible inside and outside a transaction. Lower isolation levels typically allow higher concurrency and have lower overhead.

###### READ UNCOMMITTED

Transactions can view the results of uncommitted transactions. At this level, many problems can occur, so it is rarely used in practice, because its performance isn't much better than the other levels, which have many advantages.

Reading uncommitted data is also known as *dirty read*.

###### READ COMMITTED

The default isolation level for most database systems (not MySQL). It satisfies the simple definition of isolation used earlier: a transaction will see only those changes made by transactions that were already committed. This level allows what's known as a *non-repeatable read*, which means the results of two runs of the same statement might be different.

###### REPEATABLE READ

It guarantees that any rows a transaction reads will "look the same" in subsequent reads within the same transaction (the default transaction isolation level of MySQL), but in theory it still allows another tricky problem: *phantom reads*. Simply put, a phantom read could happen when someone select some ranges of rows, another transaction inserts a new row into the ranges, and then that one select the same ranges again; the new "phantom" row will appear.

*InnoDB* and *XtraDB* solve the phantom read problem with multi-version concurrency control (MVCC).

###### SERIALIZABLE

The highest level of isolation, solves the phantom read problem by forcing transactions to be ordered so that they can't possibly conflict. In a nutshell, *SERIALIZABLE* places a lock on every row it reads. At this level, **A lot of timeouts and lock contention can occur**. This is rarely ued, but the application's needs might force to accept the decreased concurrency in favor of the data stability that results.

#### Durability

Once committed, a transaction's change are permanent.
