---
date: 2024-04-03
---

## Arch Linux

### hyperland

*hyperland* is a window manager using wayland. So AMD GPUs by its nature supports wayland, while Nvidia GPUs need further works to be done before it could be used. As of Nvidia GPUs, the documentation related could be found at hyperland's website.

#### Chrome & Visual Studio Code

It is common for Nvidia GPUs get decreased resolution in soma applications like *Chrome* (chromium) and *Visual Studio Code* (also chromium). It's basically an *xwayland* issue in combination with non-standard scaling. To resolve that, simply append `--ozone-platform-hint=auto` to commands which start these applications (or in `.desktop` files).

## `address_space`

### Crates Ignored

Crates present in upstream but absent in *TeleVM* are listed below, which are to be explained:

- `log::error`
- `once_cell::sync::OnceCell`
- `util::aio::Iovec`

### Structures

#### FlatRange

`FlatRange` is a piece of continuous memory address. It is composed by:

- addr_range: a `Address_Range`, which tells the range of this `FlatRange`.
- owner: indicates the owner of this flat-range, this range is to be owned be a region.
- offset_in_range: the offset within that region.
- rom_dev_romd: a option, represents Rom Device Read-only mode.

This structure is implemented with `Eq` and `PartialEq` trait for range searching.

#### FlatView

A wrapper of `FlatRange`. It is probably used to manager flat memories. It has three basic functionalities:

- `find_flatrange`: use binary search to find a specific `FlatRange` by provided `GuestAddress`.
- `read`: read content at provided `GuestAddress` to a destination which is a trait object with `Write`.
- `write`: write content provided by a trait object with `Read` to `GuestAddress`.

This structure is probably used by Standard VMs, since the *TeleVM* do not have the `read` and `write` method.
