---
date: 2024-04-04
---

## `address_space`

### RegionCache

`RegionCache` is used to interact with `AddressSpace`, it is retrieve by `AddressSpace::get_region_cache` with a provided `GuestAddress`. Then it can be further used to retrieve the host address according to the given `GuestAddress` and optional `RegionCache`. `RegionCache` consists:

- reg_type: a `RegionType`, could be of `Ram`, `IO`, `Container`, `RomDevice`, `RamDevice`, `Alias`, while `Alias` is missing in *TeleVM*.
- host_base
- start
- end

### AddressSpace

`AddressSpace` is effectively the manager of address space memory. It has the following fields:

- root: indicates the root `Region` of this `AddressSpace`.
- flat_view: an `Arc` of `ArcSwap` of `FlatView`. `flat_view` is the output of rendering all regions in parent `AddressSpace`, every time the topology changed (add/delete region), `flat_view` would be updated.
- listeners: an `Arc` of `Mutex` of `Vec` of `ListenerObj`, these are callbacks to be triggered when `flat_view` changes.
- ioeventfds: an `Arc` of `Mutex` of `Vec` of `RegionIoEventFd`, which represents the layout of `ioeventfds`, is compared with new ones in topology-update stage.

The following fields are not present in *TeleVM*:

- name: the name of AddressSpace
- machine_ram: an `Option` of `Arc` of `Region`, the backend memory region tree, used for migration.
- hyp_ioevtfd_enabled: a `OnceCell` of `bool` represents whether the hypervisor `ioeventfd` is enabled.

#### `new` Method

`AddressSpace`s are created by `new` methods, with provided root `Region`. Then it sets the root `Region`'s belonged address space by acquiring a write lock, and place the downgraded `Arc` to it, i.e. the `AddressSpace` owns the root `Region`. Each time a `new` is invoked, i.e. a new `AddressSpace` is created, the topology is updated through `ArcSwap`.

Isn't the `root.clone()` redundant?

#### `get_machine_ram` Method

Not present in *TeleVM*.

This method is used to retrieve the ram of this `AddressSpace`.

#### `root` Method

Retrieve the reference of root `Region`.

#### `memspace_show` Method

Not present in *TeleVM*.

A method used to print the `FlatView`. Displays the address-space flat view (addr_range start to end, priority, region type, name, offset in region) and regions (the whole region tree).
