---
date: 2024-02-10
---

## MySQL Architecture

Storage - Engine architecture, separates query processing and other server tasks from data storage and retrieval. This architecture enables choosing how data is stored and what performance, features, and other characteristics are needed.

## MySQL Logical Architecture

Three layer (TOB):

- Connection/thread handling: Services most network-based client/server tools or servers need: connection handling, authentication, security, and so forth.
- Parser, Query, Optimizer: Query parsing, analysis, optimization, caching, all the builtin-functions (e.g., dates, times, match, and encryption), and functionalities provided across storage engines: stored procedures, triggers, views, and etc.
- Storage engines: Storing and retrieving data stored "in" MySQL.

## Storage Engine API

This interface hides differences between storage engines and makes them largely transparent at the query layer.

## Connection Management

Each client connection gets its own thread within the server process. The connection's queries execute within that single thread, which in turn resides on one core or CPU .The server caches threads, so they don't need to be created and destroyed for each new connection.

## Security

When clients (applications) connect to MySQL server, the server needs to authenticate them. Authentication is based on username, originating host, and password.

## Optimization

MySQL parses queries to create an internal structure (the **parse tree**), and then applies a variety of optimizations:

- Rewriting the query
- Determining the order in which it will read tables
- Choosing which indexes to use

Hints could be passed to the optimizer through special keywords in the query, affecting it's decision making process.

The optimizer does not really care what storage engine a particular table uses, but storage engine does affect how the server optimizes the query. Optimizer might request statistics or else to make optimization.

## Query Cache

Before even parsing the query, the server consults the query cache, which can store only `SELECT` statements, along with their result sets.

## Concurrency Control

