---
date: 2024-02-22
---

## VFS

Virtual File System (VFS) is the *software layer* in the kernel that provides the filesystem interface to userspace programs. It also provides an *abstraction* within the kernel which **allows different filesystem implementations to coexist**.

### Directory Entry Cache (dcache)

The directory entry cache (dentry cache or dcache) is searched first if the kernel wants to operate on a specific `<pathname>`. This provides a very fast loop-up mechanism to translate a `<pathname>` into a specific `dentry`. `dentry`s live in RAM and are never saved to disc: they exist only for performance.

The `dentry` cache is meant to be a view into the entire filespace. As most computers cannot fit all `dentry`s in the RAM at the same time, some bits (?) of the cache are missing. In order to resolve the `<pathname>` into a `dentry`, the VFS may have to resort to creating `dentry`s along the way, and then loading the `inode`. This is done by looking up the `inode`.

### Inode Object

An individual `dentry` usually has a pointer to an `inode`. `inode`s are filesystem objects such as regular files, directories, FIFOs and other beasts. They live either on the disc (for block device filesystems) or in the memory (for pseudo filesystems). `inode`s that live on the disc are copied into the memory when required and changes to the `inode` are written back to disc. A single `inode` can be pointed by multiple `dentry`s (hard links, for example).

To look up an `inode` requires that the VFS calls the `lookup()` method of the parent directory inode. This method is installed by the specific filesystem implementation that the `inode` lives in. Once the VFS has the required `dentry` (and hence the `inode`), `open(2)` or `stat(2)` could be called. Specifically, what `stat(2)` does is once the VFS has the `dentry`, it peeks at the `inode` data and passes some of it back to userspace.

### File Object

Opening a file requires another operation: allocation of a file structure (this is the kernel-side implementation of *file descriptors*). The freshly allocated file structure is initialized with a pointer to the `dentry` and a set of file operation member functions. These are taken from the `inode` data. The `open()` file method is then called so the specific filesystem implementation can do its work. The file structure is placed into the *file descriptor* table for the process.

Reading, writing and closing files (and other assorted VFS operations) is done by using the userspace *file descriptor* to grab the appropriate *file structure* in kernel, and then calling the required file structure method to do whatever is required. For as long as the file is open, it keeps the `dentry` in use, which in turn means that the VFS `inode` is still in use.
